[MUSIC]
>> Brian: So
we are returning to recursion land now.
We're going to do our
very first divide and
conquer algorithm which is a merge sort.
Now, insertion sort has been occasionally
useful, bubble sort is never useful,
merge sort is most often the one
that you're probably going to use.
So if you're doing like array.sort,
90% of the time,
it's going to use merge sort
underneath the hood, right?
I say 90% because occasionally I believe
it's Firefox's JavaScript engine
will use quick sort
depending on the data type.
But for the most part,
you can use a merge sort and
the recently merged sort is mostly
used is it's very consistent.
It's very dependable what
you can to get out of it.
Yeah, a question.
>> Speaker 2: One question
about the previous exercise.
If you, from Drew, if you insert,
doesn't it throw off the index?
>> Brian: If you insert,
does it throw off the index?
Yeah, it will, in fact, you can
probably break out of it at that point.
So again, we're not doing
the micro-optimization at this point.
>> Brian: Yeah, I guess you could
get some potential issues with that,
it is throwing off the index and you could
break out of the loop to kind of short
circuit going through
the rest of the array.
So, it does throw off the index but at the
same time you're taking something out and
putting it back in so, it's just
expanding the length of your sorted list.
So, actually, would never be a problem
because you would push out your
largest element in that array and
it would never be smaller than anything
in the smaller part of the array.
So, that actually ends up not
being a problem, fortunately.
[LAUGH] It could be a problem.
Good question, Drew.
I like where you're head's at,
critical thinking.
Okay, merge sort.
Divide and conquer, meaning it's gonna use
recursion, and when you hear recursion,
I hope you're thinking it's gonna be
log end something, log ends going to be
throwing something into the big o,
which you would be correct.
It's very useful.
It's used a lot of places.
It's a stable sort.
We'll talk about stable sorting here
in a bit, and it's super consistent,
whether it's sorted, unsorted, everything.
It's all treated the same way,
it all goes pretty much the same speed.
And dependability, even if it's dependably
a tiny bit slower, it's usually
a good thing in computer science, because
then you have a very known quantity.
So again,
if you having problem with recursion,
like this gets a little bit tricky
because the ceases recursion.
Okay, so the basic gist of merge
sort is you take a big list and
you break it into two smaller lists,
right?
And then you're gonna take
one of these lists and
you're gonna break it into two smaller
lists and you're gonna break it into,
basically, until you're
down to lists of one.
At which point, you can no longer
break it down any further and
as we've talked about before
a list of one is already sorted.
So that's our base case.
Our base case is we arrive
at a list of one and
then we're just going to return
that sorted list of one and
then, as we come back up, we're going
to have a list of one in a list of one.
And we're going to kind of stitch
those together in a sorted way and
then we're going to
return that sorted list.
So now, we have a list of two and
a list of, maybe, two or one or
something like that, and we're going
to stitch those together in a merge.
We call it merge, you can call it stitch.
You can call whatever you want.
I called stitch just to make sure that you
get the difference that merge sort and
merge are different.
So I'm going to call it merge,
sort, and stitch.
But you'll see a lot people call it merge.
And I'll talk about that stitching
algorithm soon as I scroll down.
Exactly after I scroll down.
So you can do this in the same function.
I recommend you split it out into merge,
sort, and stitch or
merge, sort, and merge.
Whatever you want to call it, that's fine.
But the basic gist is you have, let's look
at this particular example right here.
So you have, let's say that you're
somewhere in the middle of your merge sort
and you have two sort of list that
come back to 1, 5, 6 and 2, 7, 8.
One thing, because you know you're going
to write an algorithm that's going to be
turned sorted list to, you can, therefore,
always assume that you're going
to get a sorted list back.
So this algorithm, the stitch algorithm
can assume that it has two sort of list.
Meaning, you don't have to provide for
the cases of words unsorted right.
Cuz if it gets to unsorted, that means
something else is broken somewhere else.
And we talked about this earlier that
these algorithms are about making
assumptions.
As soon as we can make assumptions,
we can do powerful things.
So, because these two, I know,
I'm positive, by the time it gets here,
it has to be sorted, I can treat
them like they're gonna be sorted.
Meaning, I can use this algorithm that
says that's only going to compare the top
two things.
So when you're first starting out,
only zero elements get compared.
So one and two, I'm gonna compare one and
two and then I'm gonna say one is
smaller sum, that's going to be the zero
element for sure in the new list.
So we're going to be
creating a new list and
we're going to be inserting
these in a sorted way.
So I'm going to take one and
put it in the new list.
So now I'm comparing two and five.
I'm going to take 2,
because 2's the smaller one.
So now I'm gonna be comparing 5 and 7.
I'm gonna take 5, cuz that's smaller and
put it in the new list, okay?
Compare 6 and 7, 6 is smaller so I'm gonna
take that and put it into the new list.
And now I've reached the end of this list.
There's nothing left in that top list,
sublist 1.
So I can just assume, I can assume that I
can add everything from the second list,
just in order.
So, list one has no more elements so
I just go ahead and add everything
from the second list on to there.
Does that make sense?
That's just the stitching
part of the algorithm.
The merge sort part of
the algorithm is just breaking
a big list into smaller list.
That's it, that's pretty much all it does.
It takes a big list based on the smaller
list, calls merge sort on those and
then it just says, okay,
put list one and list two together.
And hat's pretty much it.
It's stable?
So you have two elements
that are equivalent.
In this particular case,
we're sorting numbers but
you're not always sorting numbers.
Say, you could be sorting,
I don't know, people by last names.
Well, some people have the same last name.
But say you want to keep them in
order that they were given to you in.
So if I give you Holt, Brian and
then I give you Holt, Nicky.
Let's say I wanna keep
both of those in order,
so you don't want your algorithm to
return to Holt, Nicky or Holt, Brian.
You wanted to keep Holt, Brian, Holt,
Nicky, so that would be a stable sort and
some sorting algorithms like Quicksort,
which we'll look at here in a second,
is not stable.
If they're considered equivalent,
then they're gonna be jumbled and
you don't know how they're
gonna come back to you.
>> Brian: Now, you could argue, well,
I want to be sorting my first name and
last name.
Well, you just have to make your
sorting algorithm care about that.
I'm saying, in the case that you're
only sorting by the last name,
just FYI if that wasn't clear.
Okay, so merge sort is stable,
which is another reason that the merge
sort gets favored a lot of times is
because stability is sometimes important,
it's sometimes not right.
Sometimes you don't actually care.
Like, if one four comes back and
in front of the other, you don't know nor
care, right?
A 4 is a 4 is a 4.
So, in the case of sorting numbers,
stable sort makes no difference.
So again, tradeoffs.
Algorithms are all about tradeoffs,
and so stability is another thing you
might wanna keep in mind when
you're picking an algorithm.
Okay, what is big O?
Well, it's n log n.
So we have to go over thing
at everything at least once.
In other words,
when you're doing a sorting algorithm,
you have to look at every
element at least once.
That's just a given, you can't sort things
you don't actually know what they are.
So you have to look at
everything at least once, and
that's why everything is
gonna have at least n.
There is no sorting
algorithm faster than n.
I promise, if you find it,
you can make billions of dollars.
It'll be like Silicon Valley.
You'll do the middle outsourting or
something like that.
Okay, so then log in.
So a lot of these other
arrays take everything and
compare everything to everything, right?
And that's why you get n squared,
because everything has to be
compared against everything else.
Because we're breaking lists
down into smaller lists,
not everything has to be
compared to everything.
That's why that stitching algorithms,
because it's making assumptions that it's
getting sorted lists, it can be slightly
better than n, which is why we get log n.
Spacial complexity is n, meaning, we're
creating arrays and destroying arrays,
which means we're getting a little
bit less efficiency with memory which
sometimes you care, sometimes you don't.
For the most part, when you're in
a browser and they have 8 gigs of RAM,
you don't really care.
So we don't care.